>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 31:
WITH A DEADLINE LOOMING, THE
SENATE RESUMES THE DEBATE OVER
THE PATRIOT ACT.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE
GROWING BUSINESS OF GENDER ROLES
AND NON-CONFORMING FASHION.
>> I THINK PEOPLE SEE ME IN A
WAY THAT MAY ACTUALLY BE ALIGNED
WITH HOW I SEE MYSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: AND, THE DEATH
OF BEAU BIDEN.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE SENATE IS IN A RARE SUNDAY
SESSION TONIGHT, WRANGLING OVER
THREE KEY SURVEILLANCE
PROVISIONS OF THE PATRIOT ACT
SET TO EXPIRE AT MIDNIGHT.
THE MOST CONTROVERSIAL PROVISION
ALLOWS THE N.S.A. TO COLLECT AND
STORE AMERICANS' PHONE RECORDS.
THE HOUSE ALREADY PASSED A
BIPARTISAN MEASURE, FORCING THE
GOVERNMENT TO GIVE UP THE MASS
DATA COLLECTION AND HAVE PHONE
COMPANIES KEEP THE RECORDS
INSTEAD.
BUT THE SENATE IS LOCKED IN A
STAND-OFF.
EVEN IF A GROUP OF SENATORS
COMES UP WITH A VIABLE BILL IN
THE NEXT FEW HOURS, THE SENATE
HAS TO AGREE UNANIMOUSLY JUST
TO VOTE ON IT.
KENTUCKY SENATOR RAND PAUL SAYS
HE'LL REFUSE TO LET THAT HAPPEN,
SAYING SATURDAY HE'LL "FORCE THE
EXPIRATION OF THE N.S.A. ILLEGAL
SPY PROGRAM."
RAND PAUL'S TACTICS SPARKED
CRITICISM FROM UTAH SENATOR MIKE
LEE THIS MORNING.
LEE WANTS THE SENATE TO PASS THE
HOUSE VERSION OF THE BILL
TONIGHT.
>> I DO BELIEVE WE HAVE THE
VOTES.
SO AT THIS POINT I THINK THE
QUESTION IS NOT REALLY ABOUT
WHETHER WE'LL GET THIS PASSED,
BUT WHEN.
IT'LL HAPPEN EITHER TONIGHT OR
IT WILL HAPPEN ON WEDNESDAY OR
SOMETIME IN BETWEEN THEN.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
WITH THE VERY LATEST ON THE
SENATE DEBATE IS THE NEWSHOUR'S
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DID WE GET
HERE?
IT HAS BEEN A WEEK.
HOW DID WE GOAT THIS POINT?
>> RIGHT, THIS IS A GAMBLE BY
SENATE MAJORLY LEADER MITCH
MCCONNELL, WHEN THE SENATE COMES
UP TO A DEADLINE, ESPECIALLY ONE
LIKE LAST WEEK WHEN THEY WERE ON
THEIR WAY TO I HAVE A
INDICATION, THE SENATE USUALLY
DOES MEET THAT DEADLINE, IT IS
JUST BY A FEW MINUTES, THIS
TIME, HOWEVER, THEY DIDN'T, AND
I THINK THE DIFFERENCE, HARI,
THIS TIME, IS THAT WHEN THESE
PROVISIONS WERE LAST AUTHORIZED
BY CONGRESS, IT WAS 2011.
SINCE THAT TIME, WE HAVE SEEN
EVERETT SNOWDEN MADE HIS
REVELATIONS ABOUT WHAT EXACTLY
THESE PROGRAMS HAVE BEEN DOING
AND JUST IN THE PAST FEW MONTHS
THEY GOT A FEDERAL COURT TO RULE
AGAINST THEM.
SO THIS IDEA OF KIND OF TAKING
SOMETHING LIKE A REPORT TO YOUR
BOSS ON DEADLINE AND GETTING
THEM TO SIGN OFF WHICH
SOMETIMES CONGRESS HAS DONE
DIDN'T WORK THIS TIME, BECAUSE
REALLY THE GAME HAS CHANGED,
OUR KNOWLEDGE HAS CHANGED AND
OPINIONS HAVE CHANGED ABOUT
THESE PROGRAMS SINCE THEY WERE
LAST AUTHORIZED.
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, WHAT THE
OPTIONS ON THE TABLE HEADING
INTO TONIGHT?
>> WELL, THERE WERE TWO OPTIONS
THAT THE SENATE ACTUALLY VOTED
ON, ONE WAS JUST A TWO MONTH
EXTENSION, JUST KEEP THE
PROGRAMS RUNNING EXACTLY AS IS
AND TRYING 0 TO DISCUSS WHAT TO
DO NEXT.
THAT IS THE CLASSIC OPTION FOR
THE SENATE BUT THAT REALLY
DIDN'T GET VERY MANY VOTES.
WHAT DID ALMOST GET ENOUGH VOTES
WAS A REVISION OF THE REFORM
DATA COLLECTION PROGRAM.
THIS IDEA PASSED THE HOUSE
OVERWHELMINGLY AND IT GOT 57
VOTES IN THE SENATE, I DON'T
WANT TO GET TOO MUCH INTO
NUMBERS BUT THAT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT BECAUSE IT IS JUST
THREE VOTES SHORT OF WHAT IT
NEEDED.
SO THIS IDEA OF REVISING THE
PATRIOT ACT WOULD MAKE IT SO
THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAD TO TAKE
ITS HANDS OFF COMPLETELY ALL OF
THE PHONE METADATA, THE NUMBERS
YOU AND I CALL, FOR EXAMPLE,
THAT THE GOVERNMENT NOW HAS
CLEAR ACCESS TO.
THE GOVERNMENT NO LONGER WOULD
BE ABLE TO SEE, INSTEAD THE
GOVERNMENT UNDER THIS USA
FREEDOM ACT WOULD HAVE TO GET A
COURT ORDER AND THEY WOULD HAVE
TO ASK OUR TELEPHONE COMPANY OR
OUR TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANY
TO HAVE ACCESS TO THAT DATA.
THE COMPANIES WOULD BE THE ONES
THAT HOLD THAT DATA, NOT
GOVERNMENT.
IT IS A SIGNIFICANT CHANGE.
IT ALMOST HAD ENOUGH VOTES A
WEEK AGO AND I THINK THE THING
TO WATCH IS AS TO WHETHER REFORM
MINDED SENATORS ARE ABLE TO GET
THREE MORE PEOPLE TO JUMP ON
BOARD WITH THEM IN THE NEXT DAY,
MAYBE A FEW DAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF THOSE
THREE SENATORS GET ON BOARD,
DOES THAT MEAN THAT SENATOR RAND
PAUL, PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
RAND PAUL WILL NOT BE ABLE TO
STOP THIS SINGLE-HANDEDLY?
>> HE CANNOT ULTIMATELY STOP
THIS SINGLE-HANDEDLY BUT HE CAN
DELAY IT SO THAT WE DO EXPECT
THESE POWERS TO EXPIRE TONIGHT
@MIDNIGHT.
SENATOR PAUL HAS SAID IN A
STATEMENT THAT HIS CAMPAIGN SENT
ME THAT HE WILL OBJECT TO IT AND
BASICALLY THAT MEANS THAT IT
WILL TAKE DAYS OF PROCESS TO GET
TO A FINAL VOTE.
ANY SINGLE SENATOR HAS THAT
ABILITY AND HERE RAND BALL IS
USING IT.
SO HE CAN'T STOP A COMPROMISE
NECESSARILY BUT HE CAN DELAY IT
SO THAT THESE POWERS WOULD
EXPIRE FOR AT LEAST A FEW DAYS.
SO THEN WE GOAT THE ISSUE OF
WHAT WILL THE COMPROMISE BE?
WHAT WILL THE SENATE DO AND THE
TRUTH IS, HARI, RIGHT NOW WE
DON'T KNOW.
SO WHILE YOU AND I ARE WONDERING
WHAT EXACTLY OUR GOVERNMENT WILL
BE ABLE TO DO AND, IN
SURVEILLANCE, EITHER ON THE
SECURITY ISSUE OR LIBERTY ISSUE,
MANY EMPLOYEES OF THE NSA ARE
WONDERING JUST IN THE NEXT FEW
HOURS WHAT THEY WILL BE ABLE TO
DO AS WELL FOR THE NEXT FEW
DAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ONE OF THE
ADMINISTRATION TALKING POINTS
THROUGHOUT THIS WEEK REALLY
THROUGHOUT THE PAST COUPLE OF
YEARS IS HOW INTEGRAL NSA
INTELLIGENCE HAS BEEN TO
THWARTING TERRORISM IF THERE IS
A LAPSE COME MIDNIGHT WHO SAYS
HOW DANGEROUS IT IS AND HOW NOT
TO DANGEROUS IT IS?
>> THE TRUTH IS THAT WE HAVE NOT
GOTTEN SPECIFICS ON EXACTLY WHAT
WOULD HAPPEN, AND IT IS POSSIBLE
THAT HONESTLY THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY AND THE WHITE
HOUSE DON'T KNOW, THEY DON'T
KNOW EXACTLY HOW TERRORISTS
WOULD BE ABLE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THIS.
THEY DO THINK THAT TERRORISTS
ARE AWARE OF THIS DEBATE, THEY
ARE AWARE THAT SOME POWERS MAY
EXPIRE TONIGHT.
I THINK THE PROGRAM TO PAY THE
MOST ATTENTION TO, HARI, IS NOT
THE CON VENTURE, CONTROVERSIAL
METADATA ONE BUT CALLED ROVING
WIRETAPS AND THAT'S THE POWER
THAT ALLOWS OUR GOVERNMENT TO
TRACK TERRORIST SUSPECTS WHEN
THEY CHANGE PHONES.
YOU ARE TRACKING THE SUSPECT AND
NOT THE PHONE.
>> Sreenivasan: SURE.
>> AND ALMOST EVERYONE IN THE
NATIONAL SECURITY INDUSTRY SAYS
THAT IS A VERY IMPORTANT POWER
BUT IT WOULD EXPIRE ALONG WHERE
THE OTHER TWO IN THIS BECAUSE OF
THE MORE CONTROVERSIAL ONE, I
THINK THAT'S THE ONES THEY ARE
THE MOST NERVOUS ABOUT.
>> Sreenivasan: POLITICAL
DIRECTOR LISA DESJARDINS JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: LEADERS ACROSS
THE COUNTRY AND AROUND THE WORLD
ARE EXPRESSING SYMPATHY TONIGHT
FOR VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN AND
HIS FAMILY FOLLOWING THE DEATH
OF HIS OLDEST SON, BEAU.
BEAU BIDEN WAS CONSIDERED A
RISING STAR IN THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY AND WAS WIDELY EXPECTED TO
RUN FOR GOVERNOR OF DELAWARE IN
2016.
THE VICE PRESIDENT'S ELDEST SON
HAD FACED A SERIES OF HEALTH
SETBACKS IN RECENT YEARS, YET
WAS ABLE TO SERVE TWO TERMS AS
DELAWARE'S ATTORNEY GENERAL UP
UNTIL THIS PAST JANUARY.
AS A TODDLER, BEAU BIDEN AND HIS
BROTHER HUNTER WERE THE ONLY
SURVIVORS OF THE CAR CRASH THAT
KILLED JOE BIDEN'S FIRST WIFE,
NEILIA, AND THEIR 13-MONTH OLD
DAUGHTER NAOMI, ONLY A FEW DAYS
BEFORE CHRISTMAS OF 1972.
JUST WEEKS LATER, JOE BIDEN WAS
SWORN INTO THE SENATE AT BEAU'S
BEDSIDE.
AS AN ADULT, BEAU BIDEN PLAYED A
ROLE IN HIS FATHER'S POLITICAL
CAMPAIGNS, INTRODUCING HIM
ONSTAGE AT THE 2012 DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL CONVENTION IN
CHARLOTTE, NORTH CAROLINA.
>> IN MOMENTS BOTH PUBLIC AND
PRIVATE, HE IS THE FATHER I'VE
ALWAYS KNOWN, THE GRANDFATHER MY
CHILDREN LOVE AND ADORE, AND THE
VICE PRESIDENT OUR NATION NEEDS.
>> Sreenivasan: BIDEN SERVED IN
THE DELAWARE ARMY NATIONAL GUARD
AND WAS A MILITARY LAWYER IN THE
JAG CORPS.
HE DEPLOYED TO IRAQ FOR A YEAR
IN 2008 AND REFLECTED ON HIS
SERVICE IN A SPEECH TWO YEARS
LATER.
>> IT'S BEEN THE GREATEST HONOR
OF MY LIFE TO WEAR THE UNIFORM
OF THE U.S. ARMY.
I'M HONORED TO BE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, BUT I'M MOST HONORED TO
BE A CAPTAIN IN THE ARMY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN 2010 BIDEN
SUFFERED A MILD STROKE, AND
THREE YEARS LATER DOCTORS
REMOVED A SMALL LESION FROM HIS
BRAIN AFTER HE REPORTEDLY FELT
WEAK AND DISORIENTED.
BIDEN HAD REMAINED LARGELY OUT
OF THE PUBLIC EYE IN THE LAST
TWO YEARS WHILE BATTLING BRAIN
CANCER.
BEAU BIDEN DIED SATURDAY AT THE
AGE OF 46.
HE'S SURVIVED BY HIS WIFE AND
TWO CHILDREN
IN A STATEMENT, SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY SAID THAT BEAU
BIDEN: "...WAS FILLED WITH A
SENSE OF HONOR, DUTY, AND
HUMILITY TO THE CORE."
SECRETARY KERRY MADE THOSE
COMMENTS FROM HIS HOSPITAL BED
TODAY AFTER BREAKING HIS LEG IN
A BIKE ACCIDENT NEAR GENEVA.
THE SECRETARY WAS IN SWITZERLAND
FOR HIGH-LEVEL TALKS ON IRAN'S
NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
KERRY HAD JUST STARTED HIS BIKE
RIDE WHEN HE HIT A CURB.
THE 71-YEAR OLD IS RETURNING TO
BOSTON, BUT PLANS TO VIDEO
CONFERENCE INTO A PARIS MEETING
ABOUT FIGHTING ISLAMIC
MILITANTS.
THE FIVE TALIBAN MEMBERS WHO
WERE PART OF A PRISONER SWAP
WITH THE UNITED STATES ARE SET
TO GO FREE.
THE SO-CALLED TALIBAN FIVE WERE
RELEASED FROM GUANTANAMO BAY
PRISON AND SENT TO QATAR LAST
YEAR IN EXCHANGE FOR CAPTURED
U.S. ARMY SERGEANT BOWE
BERGDAHL.
THE FIVE HAVE BEEN LIVING IN
QATAR UNDER A TRAVEL BAN THAT
EXPIRES AT MIDNIGHT, UNLESS THE
U.S. NEGOTIATES AN EXTENSION.
MORE THAN 130 SUSPECTED NAZI WAR
CRIMINALS HAVE BEEN PAID MORE
THAN $20 MILLION IN U.S. SOCIAL
SECURITY BENEFITS ACCORDING TO A
NEW REPORT OBTAINED BY THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS.
AN INTERNAL INVESTIGATION FOUND
THAT FORMER NAZIS LEGALLY
RECEIVED BENEFITS UNTIL THEY
WERE DEPORTED FOR WAR CRIMES.
A LAW PASSED LATE LAST YEAR NOW
BANS SUSPECTED NAZI CRIMINALS
FROM GETTING SOCIAL SECURITY
BENEFITS.
IN TEXAS, AT LEAST 27 PEOPLE
HAVE DIED AND 11 ARE MISSING IN
THOSE DEVASTATING FLOODS AROUND
HOUSTON, AUSTIN AND SAN ANTONIO.
HEAVY RAIN HAS BEEN STEADY SINCE
MEMORIAL DAY.
FORECASTERS SAY THE RAIN WILL
LET UP THIS WEEK.
DAMAGES ARE ALREADY ESTIMATED TO
TOP TENS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
IN INDIA, RAIN SHOWERS ARE
BRINGING LITTLE RELIEF FROM THE
RAGING HEAT WAVE THAT HAS KILLED
2,200 PEOPLE SINCE MID-APRIL.
TEMPERATURES IN SOUTHERN INDIA
HAVE TOPPED 116-DEGREES OVER THE
PAST FEW DAYS.
THERE IS HOPE THAT THE COMING
MONSOON RAINS WILL COOL THINGS
DOWN THIS WEEK.
>> Sreenivasan: MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE TUNED IN TO WATCH OLYMPIC
GOLD MEDALIST BRUCE JENNER'S
INTERVIEW WITH DIANE SAWYER LAST
MONTH, IN WHICH HE STATED, "FOR
ALL INTENTS AND PURPOSES I AM A
WOMAN."
THE INTERVIEW BECAME A LARGE
PART OF A NATIONAL CONVERSATION
ABOUT THE COMPLEXITIES OF GENDER
AND SEXUALITY.
AND WITHIN THE LGBTQ COMMUNITY,
A CRUCIAL ASPECT OF THAT
CONVERSATION IS ABOUT WHAT TO
WEAR.
IN THIS UPDATED STORY, THE
NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS ON HOW SHIFTING GENDER
ROLES ARE CHANGING THE FASHION
INDUSTRY.
>> MY GENDER IDENTITY IS REALLY
BASED IN BOTH MY EXPERIENCES AS
A WOMAN, AND ALSO IT'S JUST
DEEPLY ROOTED IN THE FACT THAT
I'M MASCULINE.
>> Reporter: RACHEL TUTERA SAYS
IT WASN'T UNTIL SHE STARTED
WEARING BOY'S CLOTHES AS A PRE-
TEEN, THAT SHE STARTED TO FEEL
LIKE THE MOST AUTHENTIC VERSION
OF HERSELF.
YET THE 30-YEAR-OLD SAYS
SHOPPING FOR CLOTHES IN THE
MEN'S DEPARTMENT LEFT HER
FEELING INSECURE AND SELF-
CONSCIOUS.
NOTHING EVER FIT HER
PROPORTIONS.
SO SHE WAS RESIGNED TO THINKING
THAT'S JUST THE WAY IT WAS.
>> I GOT USED TO WEARING CLOTHES
THAT HID ME.
I THOUGHT I WOULD JUST END UP
BEING SOMEONE WHO WOULD PREFER
TO BE OVERLOOKED, OR NOT WORTH
SORT OF A SECOND GLANCE.
TYPICALLY YOU SHOW A LITTLE BIT
OF CUFF.
>> Reporter: AFTER YEARS OF
FRUSTRATION SHOPPING OFF THE
RACK, TUTERA DECIDED TO PURCHASE
HER FIRST TAILORED MEN'S SUIT,
AND SHE SAYS THE WAY SHE FELT
WHEN SHE TRIED IT ON CHANGED HER
LIFE.
>> HAVING SOMETHING CUSTOM-MADE
FOR MY BODY BASICALLY
REINTRODUCED ME TO MY BODY AND I
HAVE FELT, LIKE, INCREDIBLY
VISIBLE IN A WAY THAT'S NOT JUST
CAUSING PEOPLE TO TAKE A SECOND
LOOK AT ME, BUT I THINK PEOPLE
SEE ME IN A WAY THAT MAY
ACTUALLY BE ALIGNED WITH HOW I
SEE MYSELF.
AND THAT HAS BEEN THE MOST,
LIKE, POWERFUL, MIND-BLOWING
THING.
>> Reporter: THE EXPERIENCE MADE
TUTERA WANT TO PASS THAT FEELING
ON TO OTHERS.
SO SHE APPROACHED THE NEW YORK
BASED MADE-TO-ORDER-MEN'S SUIT
COMPANY, "BINDLE AND KEEP,"
CONVINCING THE OWNER THAT HE WAS
OVERLOOKING AN UNDER-SERVED
MARKET-- NOT ONLY MASCULINE
WOMEN, BUT ALSO TRANSGENDER MEN
AND OTHER GENDER NON-CONFORMING
PEOPLE WHO WANT WELL-FITTING,
MEN'S SUITS.
SHE SOON BECAME THE COMPANY'S
LGBTQ LIAISON, SERVING HUNDREDS
OF PEOPLE ALL OVER THE COUNTRY
WHO SOMETIMES SPEND UP TO $1,500
FOR THEIR CUSTOM MADE SUIT.
>> THIS IS NOT JUST A NEED THAT
IS BEING RECOGNIZED IN
PROGRESSIVE CITIES.
>> Reporter: HAS IT BEEN
EMOTIONAL FOR ANY OF YOUR
CLIENTS?
>> YES IT HAS BEEN EMOTIONAL FOR
SURE.
SHOPPING OR WEARING CLOTHES
SEEMS LIKE A REALLY MUNDANE
THING.
BUT ACTUALLY IT'S, LIKE,
INCREDIBLY MEANINGFUL AND
INCREDIBLY POWERFUL AND IT CAN
REALLY, LIKE, MAKE OR BREAK AN
IDENTITY.
>> Reporter: ANN PELLEGRINI IS
THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER FOR
GENDER AND SEXUALITY AT NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY.
>> MANY GENDER NON-CONFORMING
PEOPLE DON'T EXPERIENCE
THEMSELVES AS HAVING BEEN BORN
INTO THE WRONG BODY.
BUT, THEY MIGHT FIND THEMSELVES
DEEPLY UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THE
KINDS OF STRAIGHTJACKETS OF
GENDER.
THE WAYS IN WHICH, YOU KNOW,
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH ABOUT
17 MILLION PEOPLE TUNED IN TO
WATCH LEGENDARY OLYMPIC GOLD
MEDALIST AND CABLE TV STAR BRUCE
JENNER'S INTERVIEW WITH DIANE
SAWYER.
THEY DISCUSSED THE LONG-
SPECULATED-UPON SUBJECT OF
JENNER'S TRANSGENDER IDENTITY.
WHILE JENNER IDENTIFIES AS A
WOMAN, HE HAS NOT YET INDICATED
THAT A NEW NAME OR PRONOUNS
SHOULD BE USED, AND HE ALSO SAYS
HE'S HETEROSEXUAL, INTRODUCING
MANY VIEWERS TO A COMPLEX GENDER
IDENTITY-ONE THAT DOESN'T FIT
NEATLY INTO A MALE/FEMALE
BINARY.
YET ANN PELLEGRINI SAYS EVEN
BEFORE THIS BIG TV MOMENT,
MOMENTUM WAS ALREADY BUILDING,
AS RECENTLY THERE HAS BEEN AN
EXPLOSION OF GENDER NON-
CONFORMING PEOPLE IN MAINSTREAM
MEDIA, CHALLENGING CONVENTIONAL
GENDER ROLES.
>> THIS IS THE FIRST TIME AN
OPENLY TRANSGENDER PERSON HAS
APPEARED ON THE COVER OF "TIME
MAGAZINE."
WHY NOW DO YOU THINK, LAVERNE?
>> BECAUSE OF THE INTERNET AND
BECAUSE OF SOCIAL MEDIA TRANS
PEOPLE WE OUR VOICES NOW, AND WE
ARE LETTING OUR VOICE BE HEARD.
>> I THINK THAT WE ARE BORN AND
WE'RE ASSIGNED A SEX AT BIRTH.
THAT IS A MATTER NONE OF US HAVE
CONTROL OVER.
BUT WE DO HAVE CONTROL OVER OUR
DESTINIES AND OVER OUR
IDENTITIES, AND WE SHOULD BE
RESPECTED.
>> Reporter: PROFESSOR ANN
PELLEGRINI BELIEVES THAT THE
GROWING VISIBILITY OF GENDER-
NON-CONFORMING PEOPLE AND THE
LEGALIZATION OF SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE IN 37 STATES, HAS
FORCED THE FASHION WORLD TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THE PRESENCE AND
BUYING POWER OF THE LGBTQ
COMMUNITY.
THE RESEARCH COMPANY, GALLUP,
ESTIMATES ABOUT 780,000 PEOPLE
HAVE JOINED SAME-SEX MARRIAGES
SINCE 2004, WHEN MASSACHUSETTS
BECAME THE FIRST U.S. STATE TO
LEGALIZE THEM.
SINCE THEN, MORE THAN A DOZEN
FASHION BRANDS THAT SPECIFICALLY
CATER TO WHAT THEY CALL THE
"UNCONVENTIONALLY MASCULINE"
HAVE TAKEN OFF AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
AND NOW MANY MAINSTREAM FASHION
INSTITUTIONS ARE FOLLOWING SUIT.
IN 2012, FORD MODELS CHOSE
FEMALE OLYMPIC SWIMMER AND NEW
YORK ARTIST, CASEY LEGLER, AS
ITS NEWEST MENSWEAR MODEL.
IN THE SAME YEAR, YVES SAINT
LAURENT CHOSE A FEMALE MODEL AS
THE FACE OF ITS SPRING/SUMMER
MENSWEAR COLLECTION.
LAST YEAR, LUXURY RETAILER
BARNEYS NEW YORK FEATURED 17
TRANSGENDER MODELS IN ITS SPRING
CAMPAIGN.
AND JUST THIS YEAR "VOGUE
MAGAZINE" PROFILED A TRANSGENDER
MODEL FOR THE FIRST TIME IN THE
MAGAZINE'S HISTORY.
>> NONE OF THESE DESIGNERS WOULD
BE SORT OF TRYING TO PRODUCE
CLOTHES THAT WOULD APPEAL TO
MASCULINE WOMEN IF THEY DIDN'T
THINK THERE WERE PEOPLE WHO
COULD WALK IN WITH A WALLET AND
PULL OUT A CREDIT CARD.
>> Reporter: THOUGH MAINSTREAM
DESIGNERS ARE STARTING TO CATER
TO THE NEEDS OF THE LGBTQ
COMMUNITY, SOME SHOPPERS SAY
THAT SORT OF ACCEPTANCE HASN'T
TRICKLED DOWN TO THEIR STORES.
WHAT WAS SURPRISING TO YOU WHEN
JUST TRYING TO SHOP AT A STORE,
AND GOING INTO A FITTING ROOM?
>> THERE'S A WEIRD TENDENCY IN
PEOPLE TO PANIC WHEN THEY CAN'T
TELL IF YOU'RE A MAN OR A WOMAN,
OR HOW YOU OR HOW YOU MAY
IDENTIFY.
>> Reporter: RACHEL TUTERA SAYS
MANY GENDER NON-CONFORMING
PEOPLE EXPERIENCE BEING
FORCEFULLY REMOVED FROM GENDERED
FITTING ROOMS BY SALESPEOPLE,
AND THAT DISCRIMINATION AND
JUDGMENT IS OFTEN INEVITABLE.
THAT'S WHY THREE YEARS AGO SHE
STARTED A FASHION BLOG CALLED"
THE HANDSOME BUTCH."
THE SITE HOPES TO EMPOWER
READERS WITH A SIMPLE MESSAGE,
WHICH IS THAT THEY TOO HAVE "THE
RIGHT TO BE HANDSOME."
>> IT WAS ALMOST LIKE A
MEDITATION I HAD FOR MYSELF WHEN
I WAS FIRST SHOPPING.
IT WAS, "I HAVE THE RIGHT TO BE
HERE."
I THINK I JUST HAD TO SAY OVER
AND OVER TO MYSELF, "YOU HAVE
THE RIGHT TO BE HANDSOME.
YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO BE
HANDSOME," UNTIL IT ACTUALLY
FELT LIKE A RIGHT INSTEAD OF,
LIKE-- LIKE, A MEDITATION I WAS
TRYING TO CONVINCE MYSELF WAS
TRUE.
>> Reporter: TUTERA'S WORK WILL
BE FEATURED IN AN UPCOMING
DOCUMENTARY PRODUCED BY LENA
DUNHAM OF THE HIT HBO SERIES"
GIRLS."
SHE SAYS THE ONE THING SHE WON'T
BE TAILORING IN THE COMING
MONTHS IS HER MESSAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: WANT TO KNOW
MORE ABOUT HOW LAWS HAVE
ENFORCED SEX-SPECIFIC DRESS
THROUGHOUT HISTORY?
READ OUR INTERACTIVE TIMELINE ON
OUR WEBSITE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. LAGS
FAR BEHIND OTHER INDUSTRIALIZED
NATIONS WHEN IT COMES TO THE
NUMBER OF STUDENTS PURSUING
DEGREES IN STEM FIELDS, THAT'S
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING
AND MATHEMATICS.
AND, THE NUMBERS ARE EVEN LOWER
FOR WOMEN AND PEOPLE OF COLOR.
BUT ONE TECH ENTREPRENEUR THINKS
HE CAN CHANGE THAT, BY GETTING
STUDENTS INTERESTED IN THE
THRILL OF COMPETITION.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
LYNN SHERR REPORTS.
>> BRAIN, NERVES, NERVE-ENDINGS.
>> Reporter: SCIENCE AND SCI-FI
HAVE ALWAYS ATTRACTED FREYA
WILHELM, WHOSE FAVORITE TV SHOW
AS A CHILD WAS THIS ANIMATED
SERIES SET IN THE FANTASTIC
FUTURE.
BUT FREYA'S LIFE WENT OFF TRACK
HER FRESHMAN YEAR OF HIGH
SCHOOL, WHEN, AS A STRUGGLING
ART STUDENT IN MANHATTAN, SHE
DESCENDED INTO A CYCLE OF
MARIJUANA, PARTY DRUGS,
PSYCHEDELICS.
>> I WAS FEELING VERY
EXPERIMENTAL.
>> Reporter: BY HER JUNIOR YEAR,
SHE HAD ADDED COCAINE.
AND WAS FAILING OUT OF SCHOOL.
WHAT DID YOU SEE AS YOUR FUTURE,
AT THAT POINT?
DID YOU LOOK AT YOURSELF AND
SAY, "WHAT AM I DOING?"
>> I KIND OF JUST THOUGHT MAYBE
I WOULD GROW OUT OF IT OR THINGS
WOULD WORK ITSELF OUT.
>> Reporter: LUCKILY, SCHOOL
OFFICIALS TRANSFERRED HER TO NEW
YORK'S LOWER EAST SIDE PREP, A
SECOND-CHANCE SCHOOL WITH
EXPERIENCE TURNING AROUND LOST
KIDS.
ONE DAY, SHE WAS INVITED TO JOIN
THE ROBOTICS TEAM, COACHED BY
DR. HENRY RUAN.
>> I REALLY SAW THE DIFFERENCE
THAT MADE.
WHEN WE STARTED SHE WAS KIND OF
SHY AND SILENT MEMBER OF THE
TEAM.
I DIDN'T SEE HER VERY OFTEN IN
THE SCHOOL.
IT'S NOT EASY TO HAVE THIS KIND
OF CHANGE.
THE PERSON HAS TO PUT A LOT OF
COMMITMENT, A LOT OF
DETERMINATION, THIS PROGRAM IS
PLAYING SOME ROLE IN THAT
CHANGE.
>> Reporter: THIS PROGRAM,
CHALLENGES STUDENTS TO DESIGN,
BUILD AND PROGRAM ROBOTS FOR AN
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION.
IT ALSO HOOKS THEM ON THE
WONDERS OF-- WELL, LOOK AT ITS
NAME: FIRST, FOR THE INSPIRATION
AND RECOGNITION OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY.
>> TEAM BRAZIL!
>> Reporter: FIRST WAS CREATED
26 YEARS AGO BY ENTREPRENEUR
DEAN KAMEN, WHO INVENTED THE
SEGWAY AMONG OTHER HIGH-TECH
DEVICES.
>> I THOUGHT, IF WE COULD CREATE
A CULTURAL SHIFT THAT MADE TECH
COOL TO A GENERATION OF KIDS, WE
MIGHT START NARROWING THE GAP
BETWEEN THE NUMBER OF SCIENTISTS
AND ENGINEERS THAT WE'RE
PRODUCING IN THIS COUNTRY ON A
PERCENTAGE BASIS TO OTHER
COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: WHAT, SPECIFICALLY,
IS THE PROBLEM?
>> WE HAVE A SMALLER PERCENTAGE
OF OUR KIDS BECOMING SCIENTISTS
AND ENGINEERS THAN MANY
COUNTRIES IN THE DEVELOPING
WORLD.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE DATA
AND SEE THAT CHINA'S PRODUCING
500,000 OR 600,000 ENGINEERS
THIS YEAR AND WE'LL PRODUCE ONE-
TENTH OF THAT, IT SAYS, "HOW'RE
WE GOING TO COMPETE?"
>> Reporter: THE GAP IS EVEN
GREATER WHEN IT COMES TO GENDER.
WOMEN COMPRISE ONLY 13% OF ALL
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERS IN THE
U.S., AND ONLY ONE-QUARTER OF
THE COMPUTER AND MATHEMATICAL
SCIENCES WORKFORCE.
GETTING GIRLS AND BOYS
INTERESTED EARLY IS WHERE THIS
COMPETITION IS A GAME-CHANGER.
WHEN I FIRST MET KAMEN BACK IN
1993, 20-SOME TEAMS COMPETED IN
A HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
TODAY YOUNGSTERS FROM 41,000
SCHOOLS IN 80 COUNTRIES DO
BATTLE IN VENUES LIKE NEW YORK'S
JAVITS CENTER, WHERE WE WATCHED
NEW YORK'S REGIONAL COMPETITION
BACK IN MARCH.
AND PARTICIPANTS, PARTICULARLY
GIRLS, REPORT SIGNIFICANTLY MORE
INTEREST IN SCIENCE, TECH AND
MATH FIELDS.
>> MR. KAMEN, CAN I GET A
PICTURE?
>> Reporter: KAMEN IS THEIR ROCK
STAR.
>> CAN YOU SIGN MY NOTEBOOK?
>> Reporter: FREYA ALSO GETS HER
MOMENT, BUT AS TEAM CAPTAIN,
QUICKLY TURNS TO THE
COMPETITION.
THE GOAL IS TO LOAD UP THE ROBOT
WITH THE MOST BOXES, AND A
GARBAGE CAN.
THE FIRST MATCH GOES BADLY, BUT
AS THE TEAM REGROUPS, THE REAL
GENIUS BEHIND THE PROGRAM
BECOMES CLEAR.
>> WHETHER OR NOT THEY BUILT A
GOOD ROBOT, I DON'T CARE.
WHAT THEY BUILT WAS A BIT OF
SELF-CONFIDENCE ABOUT WHAT'S
POSSIBLE, A NEW PERSPECTIVE.
>> Reporter: FOR FREYA, IT ALL
COMES TOGETHER IN THE FINAL
ROUND.
>> FREYA!
WE WON BY FOUR POINTS!
>> YES!
WE BEAT ONE OF THE REALLY GOOD
TEAMS!
>> Reporter: NEXT YEAR, FREYA
WILHELM WANTS TO GO TO COLLEGE
AND STUDY ENGINEERING, A
CHILDHOOD FANTASY THAT FINALLY
SEEMS POSSIBLE.
FAIR TO SAY THAT FIRST TURNED
YOUR LIFE AROUND?
>> YES.
ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT'S GIVEN ME, A BIG
180° IN MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: ALL BECAUSE SHE
TOOK THAT FIRST STEP WITH DEAN
KAMEN.
>> STAY WITH IT!
>> I WILL, I WILL.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
I'M SO HAPPY.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING TO
OUR LEAD STORY, THE CLOCK
CONTINUES TO TICK AS THE SENATE
DEBATE EXTENDING THE
GOVERNMENT TO COLLECT AMERICAN
PHONE RECORDS.
THIS PROVISION OF THE PATRIOT
ACT IS GOING TO EXPIRE
@MIDNIGHT.
AND LATER OFFICIALS SAY QATAR
HAS AGREED TO TEMPORARILY EXTEND
THE TRAVEL BANS ON THE FIVE
TALIBAN MEMBERS SWAPPED IN A
PRISONER EXCHANGE FOR SERGEANT
BOWE BERGDAHL.
THE BANS WILL STAY IN PLACE
UNTIL A LONGER TERM AGREEMENT
IS AGREED UPON.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS
FOR WATCHING.